Introduction: 1 Registration refers to the recording of the contents of a document with a Registering Officer appointed by the Government. The main purpose of registration is to ensure information about all deals are recorded and maintained apart from giving the document its authenticity. It gives information to the people regarding legal rights and obligations arising or affecting a particular property. The registered documents may afterwards be of legal importance, and also aid in preventing fraud. The process of registering a document is done under the provisions of the Registration Act, 1908. The main objects of the law of registration are – (a) to provide a conclusive proof of genuineness of documents; (b) to afford publicity of transaction in respect of properties; (c) to prevent fraud; (d) to afford facility for ascertaining whether a property has already been dealt with; and (e) to afford security of the title deeds and facility of proving titles in case the original deeds are lost or destroyed. Documents generally required for registration (a) Duly stamped, signed and executed document. (b) Two passport size photos of both parties. (c) Two witnesses with valid identification proof & photographs. (d) Original Stamp Duty receipt. (e) Copy of Power Of Attorney in required cases. (f) Proof of identification of each party and witnesses i.e. Election Identity Card, Passport, identity Card issued by Govt. of India, Semi govt. and Autonomous bodies or identification by a Gazetted officer. (g) In case the property is/was under a lease from any government authority, then permission of lessor for registration of the document. (h) NOC from local authorities if the document for registration conveys land converted as house site without the approval layout. (i) Patta transfer application duly filled and signed. Compulsory registrable documents: Sl.No Situation / documents 1. 2. Instruments of gift of immovable property Other non-testamentary instruments which purport or operate to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present or in future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of the value of one hundred rupees, and upwards, to or in immovable property 3. Non-testamentary instruments which acknowledge the receipt or payment of any consideration on account of the creation, declaration, assignment, limitation or extinction of any such right, title or interest 4. Leases of immovable property from year to year, or for any term exceeding one year, or reserving a yearly rent 5. Non-testamentary instruments transferring or assigning any decree or order of a court or any award when such decree or order or award purports or operates to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present or in future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards, to or in immovable property 6. Authority to adopt a son and not conferred by a Will. 1. SALE: 2 The sale deed is the main document by which a seller transfers his right on the property to the purchaser, who then acquires absolute ownership of the property. It is also referred to as the conveyance deed. On completion of all formalities, a sale deed is prepared. This is the main document for transfer of ownership of property. The deed is executed by all the parties concerned. All pages of the deed are to be signed. The deed should be witnessed by at least two witnesses giving their full names, signatures and addresses. The sale deed of immovable property needs compulsory registration at the jurisdictional sub-registrar office. GENERAL SALE DEED This deed of sale is made and executed on this ………….. day of …………… 20... By at Sri/Smt……………. S/o/W/o………………,Occupation……………..Aged………………..years, residing …………………… (Principal), represented by his agent Sri……………………………………… S/o……………………… ,…………………. Occupation ……………………… aged…………. Years, residing at ……………………… ,…………………….by means of a General/Special Power of Attorney dated ,………………………registered/authenticated as Document No.……………………….. of Book IV of Sub Registrar’s Office…………………………………. hereinafter called the  “VENDOR” (which expression shall wherever it occurs in this deed includes the said person, his/her heirs, legal representatives, agents, executors, administrators, assignees or any person claiming through or under him) of one part. In favour of Sri/Smt…………………………S/o.D/o…………………………Occupation…..,…………………… ………….aged………… years, residing at ……………………………. hereinafter called the “VENDEE” (which expression shall wherever it occurs in this deed includes the said person, his/her heirs, legal representatives, agents, executors, administrators, assignees or any person claiming through or under him) of other part.  Whereas the Vendor is the absolute owner, having acquired the property, which is more specifically and clearly delineated in the schedule hereto, by inheritance / by partition of joint family properties/ by release/by gift / by gift settlement / by will / by sale executed by…………………………………and registered as document No…………of………………. Of Book…………………Volume No…………………..Pages……………….in the office of the Registrar / Sub-Registrar…………………………………… and since then he is in the possession and absolute enjoyment thereof. And Whereas the vendor intends to sell away the said property wherein he or she has got good and marketable title, rights, interest and possession and no other person has got any right, title or interest over the schedule property. And Whereas the Vendee offered to purchase it for a sum of Rs…………………..for which the Vendor accepted and has agreed to sell the same to the Vendee. 3 NOW THIS DEED OF SALE WITNESSETH AS FOLLOWS: cash/by 1. That in consideration of payment of Rs…………………(Rupees……………………….) only by Cheque No. Date:…………………/by Demand Draft No………………Date……………….by the Vendee to the Vendor/paid in the presence of the …………………….., the receipt of which the Vendor hereby acknowledges, the Vendor hereby sells, conveys, transfers and assigns unto the Vendee all his rights, title and interest, claim and demand whatsoever in the schedule mentioned property and delivers vacant possession thereof to the Vendee to hold the same absolutely for ever free from all encumbrances, together with all water sources, privileges, easements, appurtenances or any other things hidden in the earth belonging to or appurtenant thereto. 2. That the Vendor hereby assures the Vendee that the said property is free from all kinds of mortgage charges, agreements to sell, court litigations and any other statutory charges. 3. That the Vendor further covenants with the Vendee that knowingly or otherwise he has not caused or allowed any distress to be levied on the said property. 4. That the Vendor further assures the Vendee that he has got a clear, effectual, subsisting and marketable title to the said property and absolute authority to sell the same in the manner aforesaid. 5. That the Vendor further covenants with the Vendee that if there remains any undisclosed and undercharged liability in respect of the said property, he shall clear the same and the Vendee is free there from. 6. That the Vendor further agrees to indemnify the Vendee and keep him free from disputes if any raised or objections made to this conveyance by any one and further should any claim be made or dispute raised at any time of any one in regard to this sale, the vendor hereby undertakes that he shall, at his own cost, settle the same and execute or cause to be executed such further acts, deeds and things as to more fully effectively convey title to the property hereby sold and conveyed to the Vendee. 7. That the Vendor also assures the Vendee that if there remains any liability of taxes or rates for the said property to the Municipal Corporation / Municipality / Village Council or other Government or statutory authorities upto the date of this conveyance, the Vendor shall clear the same and in case the same are collected from the Vendee, the Vendor shall pay the same to the vendee. 8. The Vendor further assures and covenants with the Vendee that the Vendee and his heirs are entitled to peacefully and absolutely enjoy the said property without any hindrance from any person claiming through him or in trust for him. 9. That the Vendor does hereby put the purchaser in actual physical possession of the scheduled property on this day. The Vendor further handed over to the purchaser this day all the relevant title deeds, documents, and receipts pertaining to the scheduled property, which are in his or her custody. 10. That from today onwards the purchaser/vendee shall be entitled to mutate his or her name in the land in place of the seller/vendor in Revenue Office by dint of this Sale Deed executed by the vendor and shall be entitled to any benefits arising out of the said property including any compensation if the land falls under any acquisition proceedings. 11. That the Vendee is hereby entitled to get the said property transferred in his name in all Panchayat /Municipal / Municipal Corporation records and enjoy the same with absolute rights forever. 